Bunit docs (#1669)
telerik/blazor-docs: testing/unit-testing-with-bunit.md

Consider e2e testing for any case that targets a complete workflow.

## Common Issues

Considering the above-listed JS limitation, you may experience some issues when testing the components. The following sections in this article list these issues.

### TelerikRootComponent is Missing

|   | Details  |
| - | ---------|
| Issue | When testing a DatePicker the test fails with: <br/> ````System.Exception : A Telerik component on the requested view requires a TelerikRootComponent to be added to the root of the MainLayout component of the app.```` | 
| Cause |  A possible cause for this error is that in the test the component is rendered in isolation, without a layout, so the `TelerikRootComponent` is missing.|
| Workaround | Ether [mock the `TelerikRootComponent`](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/Common/TelerikTestContext.cs) or use an [actual `TelerikRootComponent`](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/Common/TelerikTestContextWithActualRoot.cs). |

> ## Attribute `data-id` is different in the markup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Attribute `data-id` is different in the markup
```

|   | Details  |
| - | ---------|
| Issue | Trying to detect an element by `data-id` fails as every time the `data-id` value in the generated markup is different. |
| Cause | The `data-id` of the components is automatically generated in our components and it is unique for each instance. Thus, this is an expected difference in the output if you call `RenderComponent` twice. |
| Workaround | This attribute is used for internal purposes only and should not be included in the check. You may implement a method that can strip the unique attributes from the component, or verify particular elements using their CSS selectors (for instance `div.k-grid`). |

> ### Scheduler throws in test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Scheduler Throws and Error
```

|   | Details  |
| - | ---------|
| Issue | Testing a component that contains a Scheduler fails with the following error: <br/> ````System.NullReferenceException : Object reference not set to an instance of an object.   at Telerik.Blazor.Components.Scheduler.Rendering.ContentTableBase`1.SetSlotMetrics(Dictionary`2metrics) at Telerik.Blazor.Components.Scheduler.Rendering.ContentTableBase`1.GetSlotMetrics()```` |
| Cause | The root cause is that the Scheduler must render in the browser and then measure and adjust its layout with JavaScript. Then this information is sent to the .NET runtime to be used there. |
| Workaround | [Mock the component](https://bunit.dev/docs/providing-input/substituting-components.html?tabs=moq) or refactor the component structure of your app, so that you can test a component that doesn't contain our Scheduler. |

> ### Cannot find Dialog content in test 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cannot Find Dialog Content
```

|   | Details  |
| - | ---------|
| Issue | Detecting the content of a Dialog fails. |
| Cause | The Dialog, Window and popup elements are rendered on root level and not in their place of declaration. |
| Workaround | To detect the popup content, target the `RootComponent` and search inside it. See: [Dialog example](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/DemoSample/DialogPage.cs) and [Window example](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/DemoSample/WindowButtonPage.cs). <br/> <br/> In future, UI for Blazor will support [creation of an interface to easily mock the DialogFactory](https://feedback.telerik.com/blazor/1533040-create-an-interface-to-easily-mock-the-dialogfactory). Follow the request to gets status updates.|

> ## Grid `OnRead` is not fired in test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Grid `OnRead` Not Fired
```

---
title: Unit Testing With bUnit
page_title: Unit Testing With bUnit
description: Unit Test your Blazor apps by isolating the tested code from its dependencies with a mocking tool like JustMock. 
tags: unit test, bUnit, mock, mocking, mocking tool, mocking solution, mocking software, mocking framework, Blazor
slug: unit-test-with-bunit
position: 5
---

# Unit Testing With bUnit

This article provides information for bUnit and how it can be used with the Telerik UI for Blazor components.

* [What is bUnit](#what-is-bunit)

> * [E2E Vs Unit Testing](#e2e-vs-unit-testing)

Reviewer 2: vs or VS

> * [BUnit Limitations](#bunit-limitations)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [bUnit Limitations](#bunit-limitations)
```

> * [Testing the Telerik UI for Blazor components](#testing-the-telerik-ui-for-blazor-components-with-bunit)

Reviewer: Use the same capitalization style throughout the list.
```suggestion
* [Testing the Telerik UI for Blazor Components](#testing-the-telerik-ui-for-blazor-components-with-bunit)
```

> * [Common issues](#common-issues)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Common Issues](#common-issues)
```

* [Resources](#resources)

## What is bUnit

> [BUnit](https://bunit.dev/) is a popular unit testing framework for Blazor. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[bUnit](https://bunit.dev/) is a popular unit testing framework for Blazor. 
```

> BUnit covers explicitly unit testing and is not designed for e2e testing. It only runs your C# and Razor code, and not JavaScript.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bUnit covers explicitly unit testing and is not designed for e2e testing. It only runs your C# and Razor code, and not JavaScript.
```

Check the following resources for a general introduction to bUnit:
* https://bunit.dev/docs/getting-started
* https://youtu.be/Co7QetPYiO4

> ## E2E Vs Unit Testing

Reviewer 2: vs or VS

The main difference between e2e tests and unit tests is that end-to-end testing focuses on the application's behavioral flow (clicking a button that populates a message) while unit testing targets functional fragments. 

End-to-end tests allow you to test the application from the user's point of view. One tool you can use for end-to-end testing in Blazor is the Selenium framework.

Unit testing focuses on functional verification. You can use unit tests to ensure that the functions or calculations that generate data, a numerical value, or a text string, are working as expected.

A case that requires an interaction with the component is a task for e2e testing.

> ## BUnit Limitations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## bUnit Limitations
```

> A known limitation of bUnit is that it does not run JavaScript. So, if the components use some JSInterop, one should emulate IJSRuntime. You may find some more details here: https://bunit.dev/docs/test-doubles/emulating-ijsruntime.html.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A known limitation of bUnit is that it does not run JavaScript. So, if the components use some JSInterop, one should emulate `IJSRuntime`. You may find some more details here: https://bunit.dev/docs/test-doubles/emulating-ijsruntime.html.
```

> A known limitation of bUnit is that it does not run JavaScript. So, if the components use some JSInterop, one should emulate IJSRuntime. You may find some more details here: https://bunit.dev/docs/test-doubles/emulating-ijsruntime.html.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A known limitation of bUnit is that it does not run JavaScript. So, if the components use some JSInterop, one should emulate `IJSRuntime`. You can find more details in the [bUnit docs](https://bunit.dev/docs/test-doubles/emulating-ijsruntime.html).
```

> ## Testing the Telerik UI for Blazor components with bUnit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Testing the Telerik UI for Blazor Components with bUnit
```

The Telerik UI for Blazor components rely on JSInterop to support their rich UX features. This can make testing with bUnit difficult or even impossible in some scenarios due to the above-listed limitation.

> You don't have to test our components, as we do that ourselves. Any unit tests for custom markup and logic have to test just that - the custom logic in an isolated scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't have to test our components, as we do that ourselves. Any unit tests for custom markup and logic have to test just that—the custom logic in an isolated scenario.
```

Consider e2e testing for any case that targets a complete workflow.

> ## Common issues

Reviewer 2: The headings below look strange:
* Some "common" issues are related to a specific component.
* Some non-common issues after the "common" section are actually common (the one about `data-id`)

> ## Common issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Common Issues
```

> ## Common issues

Reviewer: I suggest reworking this section of the document:
* The subsections are presented in a visually unappealing way.
* The use of a bullet list isn't appropriate for this use case. Maybe a table as shown on the image below?
* Rethink the titles of the sections, especially "Dialog / Window / Any component that includes popup", "Grid - ticket 1569276", "`data-id` is different in the markup".
![image](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-docs/assets/60105689/b35b02fe-5d61-4bb1-8dc8-8a5837100240)

Author: I refactored the article to include tables instead of bullet lists. Only I did not include the "Problem" heading in the first column as I don't think it unifies the column contents. I left the heading cell empty instead.

> Considering the above-listed JS limitation, you may experience some issues when testing the components. Here is a list of several common problems:

Reviewer: Sections cannot be introduced with a colon.
```suggestion
Considering the above-listed JS limitation, you may experience some issues when testing the components. The following sections in this article list these issues.
```

> ### TelerikRootComponent missing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### TelerikRootComponent is Missing
```

* Issue:

>     I am testing a DatePicker but the test fails with:

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we need to use a KB-like approach here, it may look strange.

    ````
    System.NullReferenceException : Object reference not set to an instance of an object.
   at Telerik.Blazor.Components.Scheduler.Rendering.ContentTableBase`1.SetSlotMetrics(Dictionary`2 metrics)
   at Telerik.Blazor.Components.Scheduler.Rendering.ContentTableBase`1.GetSlotMetrics()
    ````

* Cause: 

    The root cause is that the Scheduler must render in the browser and then measure and adjust its layout with JavaScript. Then this information is sent to the .NET runtime to be used there.

* Workaround: 

    [Mock the component](https://bunit.dev/docs/providing-input/substituting-components.html?tabs=moq
) or refactor the component structure of your app, so that you can test a component that doesn't contain our Scheduler.

### Dialog / Window / Any component that includes popup

* Issue:

    I am trying to detect the content of a Dialog but the test fails in finding it.

* Cause:

    The Dialog, Window and popup elements are rendered on root level and not in their place of declaration.

* Workaround:

    To detect the popup content, target the `RootComponent` and search inside it. 
    

>     See: [Dialog example](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/DemoSample/DialogPage.cs) [Window example](https://github.com/telerik/blazor-ui/blob/master/testing/bUnit-justmock/Telerik.Blazor.BUnit.JustMock/DemoSample/WindowButtonPage.cs).

Reviewer 2: Insert some text between the two links or use a list

>     In future, UI for Blazor will support [creation of an interface to easily mock the DialogFactory](https://feedback.telerik.com/blazor/1533040-create-an-interface-to-easily-mock-the-dialogfactory?_gl=1*11c7efe*_ga*MTU4MzUzNjcxLjE2OTA0Njc5NjA.*_ga_9JSNBCSF54*MTY5NDc5MjcyNS45My4xLjE2OTQ3OTYzOTcuNDguMC4w). Follow the request to gets status updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In future, UI for Blazor will support [creation of an interface to easily mock the DialogFactory](https://feedback.telerik.com/blazor/1533040-create-an-interface-to-easily-mock-the-dialogfactory). Follow the request to gets status updates.
```

> ## Grid - ticket 1569276

Reviewer 2: The ticket ID is probably a leftover ?

* Issue:

    In test environment, `OnRead` is not raised after invoking `Rebind`.

* Cause: 

    When `Rebind` is called, the Grid shows a loader. This loader is invoked with JS Interop, so the test fails silently.

* Workaround:

    Disable the [built-in loader]({%slug grid-loading%}).

## `data-id` is different in the markup

* Issue:

    I am getting the expected markup but each time the `data-id` in the generated markup is different and my test fails.

* Cause:

    The `data-id` of the components is automatically generated in our components and it is unique for each instance. Thus, this is an expected difference in the output if you call `RenderComponent` twice.    

* Workaround:

>     This attribute is used for internal purposes only and should not be included in the check.You may implement a method that can strip the unique attributes from the component, or verify particular elements using their CSS selectors (for instance `div.k-grid`). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This attribute is used for internal purposes only and should not be included in the check. You may implement a method that can strip the unique attributes from the component, or verify particular elements using their CSS selectors (for instance `div.k-grid`). 
```

## Resources

> You can find a sample project about unit testing the UI of a Blazor app that contains Telerik UI for Blazor components in the following sample projects that also utilize bUnit:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following samples demonstrate unit testing a Blazor app with Telerik UI for Blazor components, including with bUnit:
```
